Quickstart Guide
================

Welcome to the **dolphin** Quickstart Guide! 

This guide will walk you through setting up the ``dolphin`` ecosystem for AI-automated strong lens modeling and generating your first model overview plots. By the end, you'll be able to run a complete pipeline from raw data to a finished model.

1. Installation
---------------

First, ensure you have Python installed. You will need ``dolphin``, its underlying engine ``lenstronomy``, and other necessary dependencies. You can install ``dolphin`` easily via ``pip``:

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install space-dolphin

2. Setting Up Your Workspace
----------------------------

``dolphin`` requires a structured workspace (input/output directory) to manage your data, configurations, and results. You can name this directory anything you like. For a complete example, take a look at the ``io_directory_example`` included in the repository.

Inside your workspace directory, create the following subdirectories. **Note:** These subdirectory names are fixed and must exactly match the ones below.

- **data**: Stores subdirectories for each lens system. Inside each lens system's folder, place:
  - Image data files (HDF5 format).
  - PSF files (HDF5 format).
- **settings**: Stores the configuration files (``config_{lens_name}.yaml``) for each system. (See the `Config Options Guide <CONFIG_OPTIONS.rst>`_ for detailed keyword options).
- **masks**: *(Optional)* Stores custom mask files (``mask_{lens_name}_{band}.npy``) to override or guide the AI's segmentation.
- **logs**: Stores pipeline run logs.
- **outputs**: Saves the final model outputs, including posteriors and reconstructed images.
- **hpc**: *(Optional)* Stores scripts for submitting batch jobs on high-performance computing clusters (MPI environments).

**Example Directory Structure:**

.. code-block:: text

    my_dolphin_workspace/
    ├── data/
    │   ├── system_name/
    │   │   ├── image_system_name_band.h5  # Provided by you
    │   │   ├── psf_system_name_band.h5    # Provided by you
    ├── settings/
    │   ├── config_system_name.yaml        # Generated by AI or provided by you
    │   ├── masks/
    │   │   ├── mask_system_name_band.npy  # Generated by AI or provided by you
    ├── logs/
    ├── outputs/
    ├── hpc/

3. Formatting Image and PSF Data
--------------------------------

``dolphin`` expects image and PSF files in **HDF5 format**, following the naming conventions used by ``lenstronomy``.

**The Image Data File MUST contain:**
- ``image_data``: Reduced, background-subtracted image cutout centered on the lens.
- ``background_rms``: The background noise level.
- ``exposure_time``: A map of exposure times per pixel, such that ``image_data * exposure_time`` follows a Poisson noise distribution.
- ``ra_at_xy_0``: ΔRA (arcsec) of the (0, 0) pixel relative to the cutout center.
- ``dec_at_xy_0``: ΔDec (arcsec) of the (0, 0) pixel relative to the cutout center.
- ``transform_pix2angle``: A rotation and scaling matrix mapping pixel index differences (Δx, Δy) to angular differences (ΔRA, ΔDec) in arcseconds.

**The PSF Data File MUST contain:**
- ``kernel_point_source``: A pixelated Point Spread Function (PSF).
- ``psf_variance_map``: *(Optional)* A map of the uncertainty in the provided PSF (must match the PSF dimensions).

4. Running the Fully Automated AI Pipeline
------------------------------------------

With your workspace set up, you can now run the ``dolphin`` AI pipeline! The following Python code demonstrates a complete run for a lensed quasar system:

.. code-block:: python

    from dolphin.ai import Vision, Modeler
    from dolphin.processor import Processor

    # 1. Point dolphin to your workspace
    io_directory_path = "path/to/my_dolphin_workspace"

    # 2. Vision: Generate the semantic segmentation mask
    # We specify source_type="quasar" for lensed quasars (or "galaxy" for lensed galaxies)
    vision = Vision(io_directory_path, source_type="quasar")
    vision.create_segmentation_for_single_lens(
         lens_name="system_name", 
         band_name="filter_name"
    )

    # 3. Modeler: Generate the lens configuration based on the AI mask
    modeler = Modeler(io_directory_path, source_type="quasar")
    modeler.create_config_for_single_lens(
         lens_name="system_name", 
         band_name="filter_name"
    )

    # 4. Processor: Run the forward model using the generated configuration
    processor = Processor(io_directory_path)
    processor.swim(
         lens_name="system_name", 
         model_id="my_first_model", 
         recipe_name="galaxy-quasar"
    )

*Tip: Be sure to replace ``system_name`` and ``filter_name`` with your actual lens folder and band string!*

5. Analyzing and Visualizing the Output
---------------------------------------

Once the modeling is complete, you can find the detailed logs in your ``logs/`` directory and the resulting data in the ``outputs/`` directory. 

To easily visualize the results, ``dolphin`` provides built-in plotting utilities:

.. code-block:: python

    from dolphin.analysis import Output

    # Load the output workspace
    output = Output(io_directory_path)
    
    # Generate an overview plot for your specific model run
    fig = output.plot_model_overview(
         lens_name="system_name", 
         model_id="my_first_model"
    )
    
    # Save the plot for inspection
    fig.savefig("my_first_model_overview.png")

Congratulations! 🎉
You have successfully set up the ``dolphin`` environment, utilized its AI capabilities for automated masking and configuration, and generated a complete forward model.

Next Steps & Examples
---------------------
- **Jupyter Notebooks:** For hands-on tutorials, explore the `notebooks folder <https://github.com/ajshajib/dolphin/tree/main/notebooks>`_ in our repository.
- **Real-World Examples:** Check out the `"Project Dinos" GitHub repository <https://github.com/Project-Dinos/dinos-i/tree/main/2_dolphin_modelling>`_. It contains numerous examples of manually curated ``config.yaml`` files used for semi-automated modeling in `Tan et al. (2024) <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024MNRAS.530.1474T/abstract>`_.
- **Semi-Automated Tweaking:** The AI generates an excellent starting point, but you can always open the generated ``config.yaml`` and manually tweak parameters before running ``processor.swim()`` to achieve even better fits.